docs: add current thinking on upgrades (#3743)
AztecProtocol/aztec-packages: yellow-paper/docs/decentralisation/governance.md

#### Results
If the vote fails, there is no action needed.

If the vote passes, and a new rollup has been determined to be the next canonical instance, it will become canonical in the amount of days defined within the vote's timelock. It is likely there are defined limitations around this parameter, eg it must be a 3-30 day timelock. This is explained more in the timing section below. At this block height, portals that desire to follow governance should start referencing the new canonical instance to ensure as many bridged assets are backed on the latest version as possible.

:::danger
Question: what is needed to pass a vote? 

Current thikning is that it should likely be the amount expected to be held in the intial instance of the rollup, e.g. 20% circulating & 25% of that is staked -> 5% of total supply, so locked tokens do not need to participate whatsoever in a happy path upgrade to v1.
:::

:::danger
Lasse: note that if the portals follow the governance registry blindly, they assume that new inbox/outbox will always be backwards compatible
:::

### Timing
#### Phase 1 - Setup

> After the current canonical rollup, or a sufficient number of tokens are locked in governance, there is a ~3-7 day perparation period where users get their tokens "ready" for voting. ie. withdraw & deposit/lock for the vote, or choose a suitable delegate.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After the current canonical rollup, or a sufficient number of tokens are locked in governance, there is a ~3-7 day preparation period where users get their tokens "ready" for voting. i.e., withdraw & deposit/lock for the vote, or choose a suitable delegate.
```

#### Phase 2 - Voting 
After setup has completed, there is a 7-30 day (TBD) period during which votes can land on the governance contract. In practice, we envision a majority of this voting happening in the current canonical instance and the voting weight of the current canonical instance being sufficient to reach quorum without any additional token delegation. 

#### Phase 3 - Execution Delay (Timelock) 

> If a vote passes, there is a timelocked period before it becomes the new canonical rollup. This specific time period must be more than a minimum, eg 3 days, but is defined by the current rollup and in v1 may be controled by both the sequencers in a hapy path, and an emergency security council in a worst case scenario (articulated [below](#Emergency-mode)). In a typical happy path scenario, we suggest this is at least 30 days, and in an emergency, the shortest period possible.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If a vote passes, there is a timelocked period before it becomes the new canonical rollup. This specific time period must be more than a minimum, e.g., 3 days, but is defined by the current rollup and in v1 may be controled by both the sequencers in a happy path, and an emergency security council in a worst case scenario (articulated [below](#Emergency-mode)). In a typical happy path scenario, we suggest this is at least 30 days, and in an emergency, the shortest period possible.
```

:::info

> It is worth acknowledging that this configurability on upgrade delay windows will likely be flagged on L2 beat as a "medium" centralization risk, due to the ability to quickly upgrade the software (eg a vacation attack). Explicitly this decision could cause us to be labeled a "stage 1" rather than "stage 2" rollup. However, if a vote is reasonably long, then it should be fine as you can argue that the "upgrade period" is the aggregate of all 3 periods.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is worth acknowledging that this configurability on upgrade delay windows will likely be flagged on L2 beat as a "medium" centralization risk, due to the ability to quickly upgrade the software (e.g., a vacation attack). Explicitly this decision could cause us to be labeled a "stage 1" rather than "stage 2" rollup. However, if a vote is reasonably long, then it should be fine as you can argue that the "upgrade period" is the aggregate of all 3 periods.
```

A note on this, the delay would essentially be defined as part of the implementation of the instance so an instance could use 30 days always etc, while other have other values, essentially makes it more a instance specific valuation.

:::

:::danger
Lasse: We need to also include a maximum value, such that you cannot brick upgrades because you are still to execute the current one, but it is 200 years in the future.
:::

### Diagrams

> Importantly we differentiate between `Aztec Governance`, and a particular instance of Aztec's Governance. This diagram articulates the high level of Aztec Governance, specifically how the network can deploy new versions overtime which will be part of a cohesive ecosystem, sharing a single token. In this case, we are not concerned with how the current canonical rollup chooses to implement it's decision to propose a new version, nor how it implements voting. It can be reasonably assumed that this is a version of The Empire Stakes back, where a majority of the current rollup sequencers are agreeing to propose and want to upgrade.

Reviewer: The wording here can be improved to make it more clear that it is `Aztec Governance` and a particular instances governance, just that seeing only `'` being the diff can easily be missed, especially for non native speakers. 

```suggestion
Importantly we differentiate between `Aztec Governance`, and the governance of a particular instance of Aztec. This diagram articulates the high level of Aztec Governance, specifically how the network can deploy new versions overtime which will be part of a cohesive ecosystem, sharing a single token. In this case, we are not concerned with how the current canonical rollup chooses to implement it's decision to propose a new version, nor how it implements voting. It can be reasonably assumed that this is a version of The Empire Stakes back, where a majority of the current rollup sequencers are agreeing to propose and want to upgrade.
```

Not sure I but the "reasonably assumed that this is a version of The Empire Stakes back", but it is what it is

#### Happy path
```mermaid
sequenceDiagram

participant Current Canonical Rollup as Current Rollup
participant Sequencers
participant Version Registry as Governance
participant Next Rollup
participant Anyone

Current Canonical Rollup ->> Version Registry: proposeCanonicalRollup(nextAddress)
loop Voting
    loop Canonical Rollup Voting
        Sequencers ->> Current Canonical Rollup: canonicalVote(nextAddress, yes | no, amount)
        Current Canonical Rollup --> Current Canonical Rollup: Count votes
    end
    Current Canonical Rollup ->> Version Registry: publishVoteResult(yes | no | abstain)
    Anyone ->> Version Registry: addVote(yes | no | abstain)
    Version Registry --> Version Registry: Count votes
end
Note right of Version Registry: Vote passed!
Version Registry ->> Version Registry: markPendingCanonical(nextAddress)
Note right of Version Registry: Wait at least 30 days!
Next Rollup ->> Version Registry: markCanonical(nextAddress)
Sequencers ->> Next Rollup: Proposing new blocks here!
```

#### "Bricked" rollup proposals

> In this diagram, we articulate the scenario in which the current canonical rollup contains bugs that result in it being unable to produce not only a block, but a vote of anykind. In this scenario, someone or a group (Lasse refers to as the "unbrick DAO") may lock 1% (specific # TBD) of total supply in order to propose a new canonical rollup. It is expected that this scenario is very unlikely, however, we believe it to be a nice set of checks and balances between the token holders and the decisions of the current rollup implementation. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this diagram, we articulate the scenario in which the current canonical rollup contains bugs that result in it being unable to produce not only a block, but a vote of any kind. In this scenario, someone or a group (Lasse refers to as the "unbrick DAO") may lock 1% (specific # TBD) of total supply in order to propose a new canonical rollup. It is expected that this scenario is very unlikely, however, we believe it to be a nice set of checks and balances between the token holders and the decisions of the current rollup implementation. 
```

```mermaid
sequenceDiagram

participant Current Canonical Rollup as Current Rollup
participant Sequencers
participant Version Registry as Governance
participant Next Rollup
participant Anyone

Anyone ->> Version Registry: lockTokensAndVote(1% of total supply, nextAddress)
loop Voting
    Anyone ->> Version Registry: addVote(yes | no | abstain)
    Version Registry --> Version Registry: Count votes
end
Note right of Version Registry: Vote passed!
Version Registry ->> Version Registry: markPendingCanonical(nextAddress)
Note right of Version Registry: Wait at least 30 days!
Note left of Sequencers: Upgrade to new client
Next Rollup ->> Version Registry: markCanonical(nextAddress)
Sequencers ->> Next Rollup: Proposing new blocks here!
```

### Vote Delegation
Any token holder can delegate their token's voting weight to another address, including the current canonical rollup's, if it wishes to follow along in that addresses' vote. The tokens being delegated will be locked, either within the governance contract or the vesting contract.

:::info

> :bulb: Locked, uncirculating tokens can be delegated! This "economic training wheel" enables Aztec Labs, Foundation, and potential investors to participate responsibly in governance while the protocol is getting off the ground. It is TBD if these locked, uncirculating, delegated tokens will be able to earn incentives, ie block rewards.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:bulb: Locked, non-circulating tokens can be delegated! This "economic training wheel" enables Aztec Labs, Foundation, and potential investors to participate responsibly in governance while the protocol is getting off the ground. It is TBD if these locked, non-circulating, delegated tokens will be able to earn incentives, i.e., block rewards.
```

participant Sequencers
participant Version Registry as Governance
participant Next Rollup
participant Anyone

Current Canonical Rollup ->> Version Registry: proposeCanonicalRollup(nextAddress)
Note right of Version Registry: Vote starts in N days, eg 7
Anyone ->> Version Registry: delegateTo(otherAddress)
Anyone ->> Current Canonical Rollup: delegateTo()
Note right of Version Registry: Must be delegated before vote starts 
loop Voting
    loop Canonical Rollup Voting
        Sequencers ->> Current Canonical Rollup: canonicalVote(nextAddress, yes | no, amount)
        Current Canonical Rollup --> Current Canonical Rollup: Count votes
    end
    Current Canonical Rollup ->> Version Registry: publishVoteResult(yes | no | abstain)
    Anyone ->> Version Registry: addVote(yes | no | abstain)
    Version Registry --> Version Registry: Count votes
end
Note right of Version Registry: Vote passed!
Version Registry ->> Version Registry: markPendingCanonical(nextAddress)
Note right of Version Registry: Wait at least 30 days!
Next Rollup ->> Version Registry: markCanonical(nextAddress)
Sequencers ->> Next Rollup: Proposing new blocks here!
```

### Emergency mode

> Emergency mode is proposed to be introduced to the initial instance "v0" or "v1" of Aztec, whatever the first instance or deployment is. Emergency mode **will not be included as part of the canonical governance contracts or registry**. If future deployments wish to have a similar security council, they can choose to do so. In this design, the current rollup can determine the timelock period as articulated above, within some predefined constraints, eg 3-30 days. Explicitly, the current rollup can give a security council the ability to define what this timelock period may be, and in the case of a potential vulnerability or otherwise, may be well within it's rights to choose the smallest value defined by the immutable governance conract to ensure that the network is able to recover and come back online as quickly as possible. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Emergency mode is proposed to be introduced to the initial instance "v0" or "v1" of Aztec, whatever the first instance or deployment is. Emergency mode **will not be included as part of the canonical governance contracts or registry**. If future deployments wish to have a similar security council, they can choose to do so. In this design, the current rollup can determine the timelock period as articulated above, within some predefined constraints, e.g., 3-30 days. Explicitly, the current rollup can give a security council the ability to define what this timelock period may be, and in the case of a potential vulnerability or otherwise, may be well within it's rights to choose the smallest value defined by the immutable governance conract to ensure that the network is able to recover and come back online as quickly as possible. 
```

![Emergency Mode Image](../decentralisation/images/Aztec-Governance-Summary-4.png)

#### Unpausing by default

> In the first instance, it's expected that this security council can _only_ pause the rollup instance, not make any other changes to the instance's functionaiity. It is important that after N days (eg 180), or after another rollup has been marked canonical and Y days (eg 60), this rollup _must_ become unpaused eventually - otherwise it's pratcially bricked from the perspective of those users choosing immutable portals, and could leave funds or other things beloning to users (eg identity credentials or something wacky) permanently inside of it. The same is true for all future instances that have pausable functionalities.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the first instance, it's expected that this security council can _only_ pause the rollup instance, not make any other changes to the instance's functionality. It is important that after N days (eg 180), or after another rollup has been marked canonical and Y days (eg 60), this rollup _must_ become unpaused eventually - otherwise it's practically bricked from the perspective of those users choosing immutable portals, and could leave funds or other things belonging to users (e.g., identity credentials or something wacky) permanently inside of it. The same is true for all future instances that have pause functionalities.
```
